A guide on documentation style. (#109)
NUbots/NUbook: src/book/03-guides/04-general/04-documentation.mdx

---
section: Guides
chapter: General
title: Documentation
description: How to properly document code.
slug: /guides/general/documentation
---

## Conventions

> We use the javadoc documentation style for comments that are able to be formatted with doxygen. Each variable, function and class declaration should have a comment detailing the information about it in the `.hpp` file.

Author: We use the javadoc style. Most documentation generators are able to work with this style.

> We use the javadoc documentation style for comments that are able to be formatted with doxygen. Each variable, function and class declaration should have a comment detailing the information about it in the `.hpp` file.

Reviewer: I personally don't like @brief and @details anyway
I like the standard javadoc of first sentence is implied to be brief and everything that follows details

> We use the javadoc documentation style for comments that are able to be formatted with doxygen. Each variable, function and class declaration should have a comment detailing the information about it in the `.hpp` file.

Author: I personally like `@breif` and `@details`.
In the end they're both compatible.

### Directives

> This is a list of directives that we use.

Author: Not very exhaustive.

- `@brief` A brief description of the following code. Everything should at least have this tag.
- `@detail` A complete and detailed description of the code.

> - `@param` Details a paramter that is passed to a function.

Reviewer 2: `@param` usually names the parameter as the first term and then a description. This should tell us that. It should also clarify formatting details. For example, is there a colon or hyphen between the parameter name and description? Your example indicates that there isn't, but if this is a reference, it should tell us that IMO.
```suggestion
- `@param` Details a parameter that is passed to a function.
```

- `@return` Details what a function returns.

> - `@retval` Details specific return value meanings, usually for enums, booleans or error codes.

Reviewer 2: similar as `@param` - what is the expected format?

- `@throws` Details on what a function throws.
- `@tparam` Details on the template parameter, usually a [named requirement](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req) or other requirements that must be fulfilled.

> This is a list of extra things that may be used, see [doxygen](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/commands.html#cmd_intro) documentation for the full list.

Reviewer 2: I think we should mention that inline HTML works here.

> - `@example <file-name>` An example of how the function or class should be used is at `<file-name>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `@example <file-name>` Indicates that an example of how the function or class should be used is at `<file-name>`.
```

- `@see` Tells the reader to read documentation for another class, function or variable.

> - `@attention` Tells the reader that they must pay attention.

Reviewer 2: you should always pay attention hahaha :p 
```suggestion
- `@attention` Tells the reader that they should pay attention to the following point.
```

> - `@warning` Tells the reader something that may go wrong.

Reviewer 2: It should also tell the user the recommended way of avoiding the thing going wrong IMO.

> - `@note` Tells the reader to take note.

Reviewer 2: I think `note` is more like, spicy info which doesn't fit in other tags. idk. It's not quite just "take note" I think. idk

> - `@remark` A remark about the thing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `@remark` An aside or candid comment about the code or approach.
```

- `@todo` Adds a todo to the documentation.
- `@post` Details a post condition.
- `@pre` Details a pre condition.

> - `@code` and `@endcode` starts and finishes a code block, like \` and in NUbook.

Reviewer 2: the end of this sentence doesn't make sense to me

> - `@copydoc` Copies the documentation from another thing.

Reviewer 2: This would be impossible to get right without more detail or an example

> - `@dot` and `@enddot` Creates a dot graph.

Reviewer 2: I would link to some info about dot graphs here

- `@msc` and `@endmsc` Creates a [mscgen](https://www.mcternan.me.uk/mscgen/) diagram.

> - `@startuml` and `@enduml` Creates a [uml](https://plantuml.com/) diagram.

Reviewer 2: Is it going to be `plantuml` specifically? If so, does `plantuml` have a specific syntax? 
I can see that the link points to plantuml, but I wouldn't click the link if I already knew what `uml` is. I suggest changing the text of the link at least: 
```suggestion
- `@startuml` and `@enduml` Creates a [(plant) uml](https://plantuml.com/) diagram.
```
for example

> - `@f$`, `@f[`, `@f]`, `@f{<environment>}{` and `@f}` Creates latex mathematics.

Reviewer 2: A reference for how to use the latex would be good. Is it exactly the same system as nubook? is it katex?

> - `@verbatim` and `@endverbatim` Starts and finishes verbatim output.

Reviewer 2: If you don't have latex experience, you won't know what `verbatim` means

> - `@author` The author of this code, this is not used often in NUbots as we generally rely on the git blame instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `@author` The author of this code. This is used sporadically in `NUbots`. We generally rely on the git blame instead.
```

> Basic html can be used, like `<b>` and `<em>`.

Reviewer 2: what does "basic" mean? Is there a reference for what's accepted and not?
This should be mentioned earlier IMO.

### Example

This example is more than normally required, but tries to give an example of how most directives work.

```c++
/**

>  * @brief Is super cool.

Reviewer 2: I appreciate the meme value of this example hahaha
but... I think it would be better if we had an example with better tags. Something which actually would exist might make it easier. I think that `@tparam U The second argument` is a poor canonical example

Reviewer 3: Here's another example that could be used:

```cpp
/**
 * @brief Represents a robot in the simulation environment
 * @details As far as the simulation is concerned, robots have only two behaviours: move and make a sound. This class supports modelling both behaviours.
 * @tparam T The robot's type of motion (walk, roll, etc), should be a subtype of the #Motion class
 * @tparam U The type of sound the robot makes, should be a subtype of the #Sound class
 */
template <typename T, typename U>
class SimulationRobot {
    /// @brief The name of the robot, should be unique across all robots in the simulation
    private std::string name;

    /// @brief How loud the robot sounds, in decibels
    /// @see AudioEngine::playback() and Sound::default_volume
    private int sound_volume = 60;

    /**
     * @brief Check if the robot has moved since the given timestamp
     * @param timestamp The timestamp (in milliseconds of simulation time) to check for motion after
     * @throws NotFoundError The robot object was not found in the current simulation world
     * @return Whether or not the robot has moved since the timestamp
     * @retval true The robot has moved since the timestamp
     * @retval false The robot has not moved since the timestamp
     */
    [[nodiscard]] bool has_moved_since(const int& timestamp) const;
}
```

Reviewer 3: I also think we should prefer specifying `@brief` and `@details` without the tags (use the default first line + subsequent lines behaviour).

 * @detail Is cooler than all the other classes. It graduated from the university of cool.
 * @tparam T The first template argument
 * @tparam U The second template arguemnt
 */
template <typename T, typename U>

> class Cool_Class {

Reviewer 2: Don't let Trent see the case of this class name :eyes: :eyes:

    /// @brief Holds the meaning of life the universe and everything

>     private int a = 42;

Reviewer 2: hehehe
```suggestion
    private int douglas = 42;
```

    /**
     * @brief Calculates if this class is cool
     * @detail Checks against the university of cool records to see if this class graduated.
     * @param year The year that class graduated.
     * @throws NotFoundError The class was not found in the university of cool records.
     * @return Whether or not the class is cool.
     * @retval true The class is cool.

>      * @retval flase The class is not cool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     * @retval false The class is not cool.
```

     */

>     bool is_cool(const int& year) const;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    [[nodiscard]] bool is_cool(const int& year) const;
```

};
```

## Future

> In the future we are planning to use a combination of doxygen and our documentation generator for automatic low level documentation for NUbook.

Reviewer 2: we really should rename the "documentation generator". It generates documentation sure, but that name is what I would expect the stuff that generates the html for nubook from the doxygen tags to be called

---
section: Guides
chapter: General
title: Documentation
description: How to properly document code.
slug: /guides/general/documentation
---

## Conventions

> We use tokens called "directives" or "tags" to annotate different parts of a comment with rich metadata. These directives start with `@` or `\\` (`@` is preferred) and are followed by the directive name, arguments (for some directives), and a single line of description.

Reviewer 2: `\\`? I thought it was `\`?

Reviewer: Indeed, but don't bother mentioning that they can use that tell them to use @

Reviewer 2: I concur

Author: The documentation that I link has `\`

When writing modules, the `.hpp` should include a documenting comment for each class, struct, function, method, global variable, member variable and anything extra that you think may need one.

### Directives

These are some common directives:

> | `@brief` | A brief description of the following code. Every documenting comment should have this. If the first line does not have a directive it is treated as `@brief`. |

Reviewer 2: This formatting is strange. have you considered a table?

Author: This is meant to be a table

| `@details` | All the details that someone using this thing might need to know beyond what is provided in other directives. Comment lines after the initial one but before any directive are treated as `@details`. |
| `@param[direction] <formal name>` | Details a parameter that is passed to a function. Direction is either `in` or `out` and is usually omitted. |
| `@return` | Details what a function returns. |
| `@retval <value>` | Details specific return value meanings, usually for enums, booleans or error codes. |
| `@throws <type name>` | Details what a function throws. |
| `@tparam <formal name>` | Details a template parameter, usually a [named requirement](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req) or other requirements that must be fulfilled. |

> | `@author` | The author and maintainer of this code. Git blame is unreliable as some changes could just be formatting. |

Reviewer 2: I don't agree that git blame is unreliable. It might redirect you to an older git blame a few times though

This is a list of less common directives that may be used, see the [Doxygen](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/commands.html#cmd_intro) documentation for the full list.

| `@example <file-name>` | Indicates that an example of how the function or class should be used is at `<file-name>`. |
| `@see <name>` | Links to the documentation for another class, function or variable. |
| `@attention` | Tells the reader that they should pay attention to the following point. |

> | `@warning` | Tells the reader something that may go wrong, and ways of avoiding such a fate. |

Reviewer 2: This sentence came off strangely to me. Here's an alternative you might like
```suggestion
| `@warning` | Tells the reader something that may go wrong followed by preventative measures they can take. |
```

| `@note` | Extra information that does not fit in other tags. |
| `@remark` | An aside or candid comment about the code or approach. |
| `@todo` | Adds a todo to the documentation. |
| `@post` | Details a post condition. |
| `@pre` | Details a pre condition. |

> | `@code{.<language>}` and `@endcode` | starts and finishes a code block respectively, similar to \` in NUbook. `{.language}` is optional. |

Reviewer 2: is the `.` meant to be there? if it is, probably move it out of the braces.

Author: The braces and the dot are verbatim.

| `@copydoc <name>` | Copies the documentation from another thing. |

> | `@f$`, `@f[`, `@f]`, `@f{<environment>}{` and `@f}` | Creates (latex)[https://www.overleaf.com/learn/latex/Mathematics] (doxygen formulas)[https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/formulas.html].|

Reviewer 2: I think it's somwhat important to put a non-link word between two different link words so that it's obvious that it's a different link and not just a long single link
```suggestion
| `@f$`, `@f[`, `@f]`, `@f{<environment>}{` and `@f}` | Creates [latex](https://www.overleaf.com/learn/latex/Mathematics) doxygen [formulas](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/formulas.html).|
```

> | `@verbatim` and `@endverbatim` | Starts and finishes verbatim output respectively, which outputs exactly what you write. |

Reviewer 2: Does verbatim print in monospaced font too, like in latex?

Author: Probably, can find anything saying it for certain.

### Extra formatting

> HTML can be used, but should be kept to simple tags like `<b>` and `<em>`. See the (official documentation)[https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/htmlcmds.html] for a full list of available HTML tags.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HTML can be used, but should be kept to simple tags like `<b>` and `<em>`. See the [official documentation](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/htmlcmds.html) for a full list of available HTML tags.
```

### Example

This example shows more than we normally require, but tries to give an example of how most directives can be used.

> ```c++

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```cpp
```
NUbook doesn't recognise c++ as the info code, so this isn't syntax highlighted

---
section: Guides
chapter: General

> title: Documentation

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
title: Code Documentation
```
Since this only covers code documentation and I would assume a documentation page to cover more than that.

When writing modules, the `.hpp` should include a documenting comment for each class, struct, function, method, global variable, member variable and anything extra that you think may need one.

### Directives

These are some common directives:

| Directive                         | Description                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| --------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `@brief`                          | A brief description of the following code. Every documenting comment should have this. If the first line does not have a directive it is treated as `@brief`.                                         |

> | `@details`                        | All the details that someone using this thing might need to know beyond what is provided in other directives. Comment lines after the initial one but before any directive are treated as `@details`. |

Reviewer 2: This raises a question for me. If I have a long brief which has a line break mid-text, will that automatically become part of the `details`? Could you please clarify this, or reword it so that it's obvious

Author: I think I describe it well, the first line is brief and all the other lines are details.

```
/**
 * This is brief
 * This is details
 * This still is details
 */
```

| `@return`                         | Details what a function returns.                                                                                                                                                                      |
| `@retval <value>`                 | Details specific return value meanings, usually for enums, booleans or error codes.                                                                                                                   |
| `@throws <type name>`             | Details what a function throws.                                                                                                                                                                       |
| `@tparam <formal name>`           | Details a template parameter, usually a [named requirement](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req) or other requirements that must be fulfilled.                                                |
| `@author`                         | The author and maintainer of this code. Git blame is unreliable as some changes could just be formatting.                                                                                             |

> This is a list of less common directives that may be used, see the [Doxygen](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/commands.html#cmd_intro) documentation for the full list.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is a list of less common directives that may be used, see the [Doxygen](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/commands.html#cmd_intro) documentation for the full list:
```
Although with the second clause it feels strange to do. But otherwise it feels attached to the table above and doesn't match the 'These are some common directives:' sentence.

 * @details As far as the simulation is concerned, robots have only two behaviours: move and make a sound. This class supports modelling both behaviours.
 * @tparam T The robot's type of motion (walk, roll, etc), should be a subtype of the #Motion class
 * @tparam U The type of sound the robot makes, should be a subtype of the #Sound class
 */
template <typename T, typename U>
class SimulationRobot {
    /// @brief The name of the robot, should be unique across all robots in the simulation
    private std::string name;

    /// @brief How loud the robot sounds, in decibels
    /// @see AudioEngine::playback() and Sound::default_volume
    private int sound_volume = 60;

    /**
     * @brief Check if the robot has moved since the given timestamp
     * @param timestamp The timestamp (in milliseconds of simulation time) to check for motion after
     * @throws NotFoundError The robot object was not found in the current simulation world
     * @return Whether or not the robot has moved since the timestamp
     * @retval true The robot has moved since the timestamp
     * @retval false The robot has not moved since the timestamp
     */

>     [[nodiscard]] bool has_moved_since(const int& timestamp) const;

Reviewer 2: :heart_eyes:

Reviewer 3: LOL

---
section: Guides
chapter: General
title: Code Documentation

> description: How to properly document code.

Reviewer 2: Major nitpick alert:
I wouldn't call this "properly documenting code" per se. It's more adding tags for documentation generation. We could make this a general guide for documentation, but that's not what this is. I wouldn't be against that tho

```suggestion
description: How to use documentation tags
```

slug: /guides/general/documentation
---

## Conventions

> We use the javadoc documentation _style_, all this means is that directives are formatted with a `@`. Note that `@` and `\\` are interchangeable when looking at other sources.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We use the javadoc documentation _style_. This means is that directives are formatted with a `@`. Note that `@` and `\\` are interchangeable when looking at other sources.
```

> Each declaration, or definition in the absence of declaration, that is a part of an api, e.g. declared in the `.hpp` file, should have a documenting comment.

Reviewer 4: This needs to be rewritten, it's too jumbled. What is it you're trying to say here? 'Everything in the `.hpp` should have a documenting comment'?

### Directives

> This is a list of directives some that we use.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is a list of common directives
```
or something like this, at least fix up the grammar.

> - `@brief` A brief description of the following code. Every documenting comment should have this.

Reviewer 4: Would this be better as a table?

Author: But that requires effort.

- `@detail` All the details that someone using this thing might need to know beyond what is provided in other directives.
- `@param[direction] <formal name>` Details a parameter that is passed to a function. Direction is either `in` or `out` and is usually omitted.
- `@return` Details what a function returns.
- `@retval <value>` Details specific return value meanings, usually for enums, booleans or error codes.
- `@throws <type name>` Details on what a function throws.
- `@tparam <formal name>` Details on the template parameter, usually a [named requirement](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req) or other requirements that must be fulfilled.

> This is a list of extra things that may be used, see [doxygen](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/commands.html#cmd_intro) documentation for the full list.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is a list of less common directives that may be used, see the [doxygen](https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/commands.html#cmd_intro) documentation for the full list.
```

> - `@example <file-name>` Indicates that an example of how the function or class should be used is at `<file-name>`.

Reviewer 4: Table?

- `@see <name>` Tells the reader to read documentation for another class, function or variable.
- `@attention` Tells the reader that they should pay attention to the following point.
- `@warning` Tells the reader something that may go wrong, and ways of avoiding such a fate.

> - `@note` Some extra "Spicy" info which does not fit in other tags.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `@note` Extra information that does not fit in other tags.
```

- `@remark` An aside or candid comment about the code or approach.
- `@todo` Adds a todo to the documentation.
- `@post` Details a post condition.
- `@pre` Details a pre condition.

> - `@code{.<language>}` and `@endcode` starts and finishes a code block respectively, like \` and in NUbook. `{.language}` is optional.

Reviewer 4: ' like \` and in NUbook.'
I feel like there's something missing here?

- `@copydoc <name>` Copies the documentation from another thing.
- `@f$`, `@f[`, `@f]`, `@f{<environment>}{` and `@f}` Creates latex mathematics.
- `@verbatim` and `@endverbatim` Starts and finishes verbatim output respectively, outputs exactly what you wrote.

> - `@author` The author of this code. This is used sporadically in `NUbots`. We generally rely on the git blame instead.

Reviewer 4: I feel like relying on git blame is dodgy. Someone used that the other week to say that I was responsible for a piece of code when I had nothing to do with it, it was formatting or something like that.

### Example

This example is more than normally required, but tries to give an example of how most directives work.

```c++
/**
 * @brief Is super cool.
 * @detail Is cooler than all the other classes. It graduated from the university of cool.
 * @tparam T The first template argument
 * @tparam U The second template arguemnt
 */
template <typename T, typename U>
class CoolClass {
    /// @brief Holds the meaning of life the universe and everything
    private int douglas = 42;

    /// @copydoc douglas
    private int ryan = 42;

    /**
     * @brief Calculates if this class is cool
     * @detail Checks against the university of cool records to see if this class graduated.
     * @param year The year that class graduated.
     * @throws NotFoundError The class was not found in the university of cool records.
     * @return Whether or not the class is cool.
     * @retval true The class is cool.
     * @retval false The class is not cool.
     */
    [[nodiscard]] bool is_cool(const int& year) const;
};

/**
 * @brief Prints the if CoolClass is cool or not.
 * @see CoolClass::is_cool
 */
void print_cool();
```

## Future

> In the future we are planning to use a combination of doxygen and our NUClear mapperfor automatic low level documentation for NUbook.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the future we are planning to use a combination of doxygen and our NUClear mapper for automatic low level NUbook documentation.
```
